# 8086/88
* The chip had physical storage for registers, named AX, BX, and so on.
* Each register could hold 16 bits
* Data moved between memory and registers over a bus

## Instruction decode
Actual electrical process that takes an instruction stream and turns it into an actual electrical action on registers and memory.

Typical format:
```
      BYTE 1              BYTE 2       
| | | | | | | | |   | | | | | | | | |  ...
|   OPCODE  |D|W|   |MOD| REG | R/M |
```

## MOV
MOV: copy data from one location to another (not a literal move)

### Register-register mov
MOV AX,BX 
    MOV : the mnemonic
    AX : destination register
    BX: source register

The assembler *encodes* the assembly language instruction written by a human into binary format that the instruction decoder used to *decode* and execute the instruction

Register-register move is a 2 byte encoded instruction
Most significant 6 bits: opcode
bits 7,8: D and W flags
2nd byte: MOD (2 bits), REG (3 bits), R/M (3 bits)

D: 0 = register field is not the destination, 1 = register is the destination (R/M is the other field)
W: 1 = wide register (16 bits), 0 = 8 bits 
MOD: memory or register operation
REG: encodes a register
R/M: encodes a register or memory

MOV AX,BX -> copy full BX into AX
MOV AL,BL -> copy lower 8 bits from BX to lower bits of AX
MOV AH,BH -> copy higher 8 bits from BX to higher bits of AX

### Register-memory mov
`MOV BX, [<memory_address>]` // Load data from the given memory address to BX. Address is in square brackets.
`eg: MOV BX, [75]` // Load data from the 76th (0-indexed) memory location
                 // This will load byte 76 and 77 since we need 2 bytes        

* So the memory location is just an index into the array that is memory. Pointers are also exactly this.

`MOV [75], BX` // Write data from BX into slot 76 and 77 in the memory

Effective Address calculation:
`MOV BX [BP + 75]`
    Get whetever is in the BP register, add 75 and then look in that memory index

`MOV BX, [2.AX + BX + 7]` // this is not legal
* R/M field encodes the type of address 
* MOD field: whether if has a displacement (+75 kind of thing)
    00: doesn't generally have a displacement `[...]`
        exception:  if R/M is 110, there is a 16bit displacement, so there are 2 extra bytes
    01: 8 bit displacement `[... + 8_bit_value]`. Has one extra byte in the instruction. 
    10: 16 bit displacement `[... + 16_bit_value]`. Has two extra bytes in the instruction. 

* R/M Field: which equation out of a set of 8 equation we need, eg. BX + SI, BX + PI, etc.


### Immediate to register mov
* A value encoded into the instruction stream (not in a separate memory location)
* e.g.: mov AX, 12
```
      BYTE 1              BYTE 2            BYTE 3     
| | | | | | | | |   | | | | | | | | |   | | | | | | | | |
|1 0 1 1|W| REG |   |   Lower byte  |   |  Higher byte  |
```

### Immediate to memory mov
mov [BP+75], byte 12 // put the number 12 in byte form (8 bits)
mov [BP+75], word 12 // put the number 12 in word form (16 bits)

## ADD
`ADD AX, BX`: AX = AX + BX

Encoding is similar to MOV.

```asm

MOV AX, [BP]
MOV BX, [BP + 2]
ADD AX, BX

; the above can be optimised to:
MOV AX, [BP]
ADD AX, [BP + 2] ; no need for BX
```


SUB and CMP also follow similar patterns to ADD and MOV

CMP is the same as SUB, except that it doesn't store the result of the subtraction.


## Other Instructions
* MUL, DIV: unsigned integer multiply, divide
* IMUL, IDIV: signed integer multiply, divide
* SHR: logical shift right (shifts in 0s)
* SAR: arithmetic shift right (preserves sign)
* SHL and SAL are the same (shift left) - shift left by 1 = multiply by 2 (unless there is "overflow")
* AND, XOR, OR, NOT - like ADD/SUB/CMP except they can't carry (so carry flag won't be set)
* TEST is analogous to CMP, but for logical operations. Doesn't write the result. SUB:CMP :: AND:TEST
* LEA can perform an addition using one of the effective address calculation options, eg. BP + SI, BX + DI, etc., and write to the destination register. Doesn't treat the "effective address" as an address
* INC: add 1
* DEC: subtract 1

## Flags
* Not something that CPU sets. They're instruction dependent. For example, MOV doesn't set any flags, but SUB may set the zero flag.
* Zero flag: set if result of operation is 0
* Sign flag: set if result is negative, reset otherwise
* Carry flag: if there was a carry in the result
* Auxiliary carry flag: if there was a carry from the lower nibble (4bits) to the higher nibble in the result

## IP Register
* Points to the current byte. Advanced *before* executing the current instruction.

## Memory
* 8086 has 1M memory = 1024*1024 = 2^20 bytes, so addressing would require 20 bits
* Since registers are only 16 bits, we use segment registers for the highest 4 bits to access all the 64KB "segments" of the memory. Segment register acts as the higher 16 bits of the 20 bit value with lower bits equal to 0, and a general purpose registers stores the lower 16bits. These are added to get the 20 bit memory address.


## Stack
* Starts at a high value (high byte number in memory) and grows by subtracting, i.e., goes to lower bytes
* When a function is called, the SP (stack pointer) register is advanced (decreased in byte number it's pointing to) by the number of bytes that we need to save the registers from the caller code
* When the function returns, we restore the original registers from the stack and move the SP back to where it was pointing earlier (by increasing the value by the same number of bytes)
* Example:
```asm
; pushing to the stack:
sub sp, 2
mov sp, ax

; popping from the stack/restoring
mov ax, sp
add sp, 2
```
* There are special instructions to do the above operations: PUSH and POP
* PUSH AX: same as sub sp, 2 followed by mov sp, ax;
* POP AX: same as mov ax, sp followed by add sp, 2; 
* To know where to return back after the function executes, we need to push the ip register to the stack. This is done by the "call" and "ret" instructions.
    * call is same as jmp, except that it pushes the IP register to the stack.
    * "push IP" isn't legal as we cant to mov on IP
    * ret takes whatever is the value at the top of the stack and writes that value to the ip register. It will be the last instruction in the function
* THe pushing and popping may be done by the caller or the callee. It just needs to happen once in order.
* Calling convention is the set of rules that defines:
    * Who does push and pop for which register
    * Which registers do not get restored
    * Where are the parameters stored, i.e., are they pushed to the stack or some specific registers are used to store them
* The calling convention must be agreed upon by 2 parties writing code for opposite sides of a system, eg a library author and a user of the library

* ABI (Application Binary Interface):
    * Standardised system-wide
    * Specifies rules for calling conventions and other related standards
